[Music]
hi and welcome to chapter 10 of the
beginning of infinity a dream of
Socrates this chapter I'm going to
present in two parts there's rather a
natural divide I seem to think between
the conversation that goes on between
Hermes and Socrates and then the next
conversation would have which happens
without Hermes but with Socrates and his
followers mainly Plato I doubt if David
Deutsch had this in mind at all but I
like to think that her needs as either a
traveler from the future could be even
David himself going back to speak to
Socrates about epistemology or and this
might be even more bizarre Hermes
represents the creative process itself
mysterious and godlike in its capacity
to conjure knowledge or maybe of course
Hermes is just Hermes and this chapter
is of course primarily about
epistemology it's a funny condensed form
of the basic themes that appear as far
back as in chapters three
problem-solving four criteria for
reality and chapter five virtual reality
for from David's previous book the
fabric of reality I had some trouble
trying to figure out how I would
actually read this particular chapter
because the entire chapter is a dialogue
well basically the entire chapter is
dialogue or even a play of sorts I hope
my solution to this issue of what to do
about reading it isn't too distracting
I'm not reading the whole thing of
course as usual I'm just taking snippets
and doing some commentary on them but if
you are listening on audio only and you
don't have access to the video you might
be missing something
part of the visual element here that
might well I think could possibly assist
with understanding who's saying what so
if you have access to the video I
encourage people watch this video anyway
we'll see how it goes so let's just dive
right in and commence with chapter 10 a
dream of Socrates I'm gonna go old
school now and just read the
introduction from the paper version of
the book for a change and David writes
to set the scene Socrates is staying at
an inn near the Temple of the Oracle of
Delphi
Delfy or Delphi suppose it depends upon
your accent anyway
with his friend KF on he has today asked
the Oracle who is the wisest man in the
world so that they might go and learn
from him but to their annoyance the
priestess who provides the Oracles voice
on behalf of the god Apollo merely
announced no one is wiser than socrates
sleeping now on an inn comfortable bed
in italian exorbitantly expensive room
Socrates hears a deep melodious voice in
toning his name and so we're about to
find out who that is returned socrates
go away I've already made too many
offerings today and you're not going to
ring anymore out of me unto wise for
that and you heard I seek no offering
and what do you want
well I'm sure that some of my associates
camped outside I'll be glad to it is not
them that I seek but you to use then you
shall be disappointed stranger now
kindly leave me to my hard-earned rest
very well white I am asleep hmm dreaming
and you are the god Apollo what makes
you think so these precincts are sacred
to you it is night time and there is no
lamp yet I see you clearly this is not
possible in real life so you must be
coming to me in a dream you reason
coolly are you not afraid it back I ask
you in return are you a benevolent God
or a malevolent God if benevolent then
what do I have to fear if malevolent
then I disdained to fear you we
Athenians are a proud people and
protected by our goddess as you surely
know twice we defeated the Persian
Empire against overwhelming odds and now
we are defying Sparta it is our custom
to defy anyone who seeks our submission
you would have God a benevolent God
would not seek it on the other hand it
is also our custom to give a hearing to
anyone who offers us honor
criticism seeking to persuade us freely
to change our minds for we want to do
what is right so there we've got a
problem
with the worship of deities bad gods
won't fear so they don't deserve it
good gods don't want for you so why fear
them the same light go for worship or
any other demand a God traditionally has
supposed to desire in the next section
which I'm not going to read hermie says
that he reveals no facts about anything
but he is there to reveal some knowledge
about knowledge hermes is of course
providing the popular in view but how
did popper himself ever come to this
knowledge of knowledge how did he create
knowledge about knowledge we don't know
how creativity works of course we might
ask how Darwin came to Darwinism or
Einstein can't with relativity and so on
problems confronted them and somehow in
the mind the solution presented itself
and first we test that solution that
purported solution within the laboratory
of our own minds if you like before
checking it against external reality so
in the next section
Hermes asks papa what is easiest to see
and papa responds that it is whatever is
before your eyes and Hermes asks him if
he's sure about that very well obviously
I can't be sure of anything but I don't
want to be I can think of nothing more
boring no offense meant wise Paulo then
to attain the state of being perfectly
secure in one's beliefs which some
people seem to yearn for I see no use
for it other than to provide a semblance
of an argument when one doesn't have a
real one fortunately that mental state
has nothing to do with what I do you and
for which is to discover the truth of
how the world is and why and even more
of how it should be congratulations
Socrates under epistemological wisdom
the knowledge that you seek objective
knowledge is hard to come by but
attainable that mental state you did not
seek justify belief is sought by many
people especially priests and
philosophers but in truth beliefs cannot
be justified except in relation to other
beliefs and even then only thoroughly so
the quest for their justification can
lead only to an in
to dress each step of which would be
itself subject to era again I know this
indeed and as you were quite miramar it
doesn't count as a revelation if I tell
you what you already know yet notice
that that remark is precisely what
people who seek justify belief do not
agree with what I'm sorry but that was
too convoluted to comment from my
allegedly wise mind or comprehend please
explain what I am to notice about these
people who seek justified belief merely
this suppose they just happened to be
aware of the explanation of something
you and I would say they know it but to
them no matter how good an explanation
is and no matter how true an important
and useful it may be they still do not
consider it to be knowledge it is only
if a God then comes along and reassures
and it is true or if they imagine such a
God or other authority that they counted
as knowledge so to them it does count as
a revelation if the authority tells them
what they are already fully aware of I
see that and I see that they are foolish
because for all they know the authority
may be toying with them or trying to
teach them some important lesson or
there may be misunderstanding the
authority or they may be mistaken in
their belief that it is an authority yes
so the thing that they call knowledge
namely justified belief is a chimera it
is unattainable to humans except in the
form of self-deception it is unnecessary
for any good purpose and it is undesired
by the wisest among mortals
I know as an orphan he is new at two but
he is no longer among the mortgage so
there we have a criticism of the JTB
justified true belief version of
knowledge knowledge is not justified
belief it's not justified because if it
was then you'd have to wonder how the
justifications are themselves justified
and you'd end up with an infinite
regress you have to start somewhere on
that view you need a foundation which is
absolutely certain and if you have this
absolutely certain foundation which is
unjustified from there you can start
building your justifications to reach
whatever the conclusion is that you have
this is the traditional and completely
false view of epistemology so as david
says deaths through soccer
and through Hermes it's unnecessary to
seek justification the claim that
something is actually true or probably
true it's unwise to seek that sort of
validity and of course also notice that
knowledge isn't about beliefs which is a
private going on inside of your mind
purportedly none of that scheme is
needed we're instead we're right to say
we know a thing when we have an
explanation for it it need not be
justified it need not be true or
believed and in fact my favorite example
of this is just any old scientific
theory which is nonetheless useful and
my favorite of those is of course
Newton's theory of gravity on newton's
law of gravity as it's usually called
it's known to be false so it can't be
true so it automatically fails at the T
hurdle of JTB I don't believe it and I
don't think anyone does believe it
because we know it to be false so it's
not it files it to be hurdle as well and
as for justified well we can't justify
it as true knowing that it's completely
false knowing that it's completely false
and it rests upon assumptions that are
themselves not only not justified but
known to be false so for example in a
Newton's theory of gravity Newton's law
of gravity it rests upon this assumption
that the gravity is a force between
masses but this force acts
instantaneously so it violates special
relativity so it can't be true so in
other words Newton's law of gravity
actually fails all three features of the
JTB test nonetheless nonetheless we know
it I know it
every student of physics knows it it's a
piece of knowledge we still call it
knowledge it's useful it helps us to
make predictions and accomplish things
like even get to the moon for example
okay so Newton's theory Newton's law of
gravity is used it's a bit of knowledge
that is useful it contains useful truth
but it ultimately in the final analysis
is false and it's not justified it's not
true and no one should believe it
knowledge as David explains elsewhere is
useful information and more precisely
elsewhere in the beginning of infinity
he explains that knowledge is that thing
which once it comes into being tends to
cause itself to remain so so once it's
in Stan's eiated in matter it tends to
course itself to remain instantiated and
matter in some way it could be in
different form
but the thing about knowledge is it's
self-sustaining in some way and this is
certainly true of Newton's theory it's a
piece of knowledge that has caused
itself to remain in place because it's
so useful over time despite being shown
to be false it's also here in this
section that we hear of zernoff ADIZ for
the first time we'll come back to him
later who's a philosopher poet who lived
from like 570 to 475 BC so his death was
about five years prior to the birth of
Socrates whatever the case if popper is
the father of critical rationalism then
I guess enough anis is like the great
great great great great grandfather in
some sense what follows now in the
dialog and which I also won't read is a
very long section about what can
actually be seen what is obvious and
right before our eyes and so on and
whether we and how we can rule out
whether or not certain things are true
on the basis of that or whether we are
dreaming when we think we're seeing what
can Socrates be sure of this is what
hermes is pressing him on it seems to me
that you've been asking questions about
me what is in front of me what I can
easily see whether I am sure and so on
but I seek fundamental truths of which
is tomato not a single one of them is
predominantly about me so let me stress
again I am not sure what is in front of
my eyes ever with my eyes open or closed
asleep or awake nor can I be sure what
is probably in front of my eyes for how
could I estimate the probability that I
am dreaming when I think I am awake well
that my whole previous life has been but
a dream in which it has pleased one of
you immortals to imprison me indeed I
might even be a victim of a mundane
deception such as those of conjurer's we
know that a conjurer is deceiving us
because he shows us something that
cannot be and then asks for money but if
he were to forego his fee and show me
something that can be but is not how
could I ever know perhaps this entire
vision of you is not a dream after all
but some cunning conjurer's trick on the
other hand perhaps you really are here
in person and I am awake after all none
of this can I ever be sure is so or not
so I can however conceive of knowing
some of it precisely and it's the same
clue
of your moral knowledge in regards to
what is right and wrong could you be
mistaken or misled by the equivalent of
mirages or tips that seems a little
harder to imagine for no god to moral
knowledge I need my senses very little
it is just mainly my own thoughts I
reason about what is right and wrong or
what makes a person virtuous a wicked I
can be mistaken of course in these
mental deliberations but not so easily
deceived by outside tricks or illusions
for they affect only our senses and know
how reason how then do you account for
the fact that you Athenians are
constantly squabbling among yourselves
about what qualities constitute virtue
or vice and what actions are right or
wrong why is that puzzling we disagree
because it is easy to be mistaken yet
despite that we also agree about many
such issues from this I speculate where
we have failed so far to agree it is not
because anything is actively deceiving
us but simply because some issues are
hard to reason about just as there are
many truths in geometry that even
Pythagoras did not know but which future
geometers may discover as that otherwise
mortals and offered his root the gods
did not reveal from the beginning all
things to us but in the course of time
through seeking we may learn and know
things better that is what we Athenians
have done in regard to moral knowledge
through seeking we have learned and
agreed upon the easy things an in future
by the same means namely by refusing to
hold any of our ideas immune from
criticism we may learn some matters not
so light so in that section Socrates
thinks it is harder to be deceived about
moral issues because in that domain his
reason so he argues is the sole arbiter
of what is true but Hermes goes on to
point out that Sparta teaches their
children wildly different moral lessons
compared to Athens and this causes
Socrates to begin teasing apart the
differences between Athens and Sparta he
arrives at the conclusion that the
difference between these two societies
is all about endless critical debate
which Athens engages in but which Sparta
prohibits so here we're connecting a
very epistemological concern about how
it is we come to understand knowledge we
are come to understand
some truth about the world and the
extent to which a society is open or
closed or dynamic and Static so we've
got a connection we've draw a straight
line connection between epistemology in
that way and morality and and political
systems moreover since the Spartans
never seek improvement it is not
surprising that they never find it we in
contrast have sorted by constantly
criticizing and debating and trying to
correct our ideas and behavior and
thereby we are well placed to learn more
in the future it follows then that it is
wrong of the Spartans to educate their
children to hold their city's ideas laws
and customs immune from criticism no hey
I thought you weren't going to reveal
moral truths
I can't hope that if it follows
logically from epistemology but anyway
you already know this one yes I do and I
see what you are getting at you are
showing me that there are such things as
mirages and tricks in regards to moral
knowledge some of them are embedded in
the Spartans traditional moral choices
their whole way of life misleads and
traps them because one of them has taken
beliefs if they must take no steps to
prevent their way of life from
misleading and trapping them so there we
have it the moral imperative not to
destroy the means of error correction is
the only moral imperative from which
others follow if we want to continue
being a society that makes progress
continue being dynamic a society that
prevents itself from being destroyed
through stasis we must continue to
generate knowledge but that is only
possible if debate is allowed so speech
has to be free people have to be friend
so on in short we cannot have laws or
customs in place that hold ideas laws
and customs immune from criticism so I
say that again we can't have laws or
customs in place that themselves hold
ideas laws and customs immune from
criticism we need to protect error
correction not prevent it so I'm
skipping another lengthy section again
and Hermes is about to lead Socrates
into a defensive fallibilism yet there
is even more difference than you think
bear in mind that the Spartans and
Athenians alike are but fallible men
subject to misconceptions and errors in
all were thinking wait we are fallible
in all our thinking is there literally
no idea that we may hold immune from
criticism what walk hmm well what about
the truth is arithmetic like two plus
two equals four well the fact that Delfy
exists what about the geometrical fact
that the angles of a triangle sum to two
right angles revealing no facts i cannot
confirm that all three of those
propositions are even true but more
important is this how did you come to
choose those particular propositions as
candidates for immunity from criticism
why Delphian not Athens why 2 plus 2 or
not 3 plus 4 why not the theorem of
Pythagoras was it because you decided
that the proposition Hugh Charles would
best make your point because they were
the most obviously unambiguously true of
all the propositions you considered
using yes but then how did you determine
how obviously an unambiguous take
through each of those candidate
propositions was compared with the
others did you not criticize them did
you not quickly attempt to think of ways
or reasons they might conceivably be
false yes I did I see had I held them
immune from criticism I would have had
no way of arriving at that conclusion so
you are after all a thoroughgoing
fallibilist so you mistakenly believe
you will not I nearly doubted it
you doubted and criticized fallibilism
itself as a true fallibilist hood that
is so moreover had I not criticized that
I could not have come to understand why
it is true my doubt improved my
knowledge of an important truth as
knowledge held immune from criticism can
never be improved this too you already
knew for this why you always encourage
everyone to criticize even that which
seems most obvious to you and why I set
an example by doing it to them perhaps
now consider what would happen if the
fallible Athenian voters made a mistake
and enacted a law that was very unwise
and on
which last they often do
imagine a specific case for the sake of
argument suppose they were somehow
firmly persuaded that thieving is a high
virtue from which many practical
benefits flow and that they abolished
all walls of obediently what would
happen everyone would start thieving
very soon those who were best at
thieving and living among the thieves
would become the wealthiest citizens but
most people would no longer be secure in
their property even most thieves and the
farmers and artisans and traders would
soon find it impossible to continue to
produce anything worth stealing
so disaster and starvation would follow
while the promised benefits would not
and they would all realize they had been
mistaken what day let me remind you
again of the fal ability of human nature
Socrates given that they were firmly
persuaded that thievery was beneficial
wouldn't their first reaction to those
setbacks be that there was not enough
thievery going on wouldn't they enact
laws to encourage it steal the doll alas
yes at first yet no matter how firmly
they were persuaded these setbacks would
be problems in their lives which they
would want to solve a few among them
would eventually begin to suspect that
increased thievery might not be the
solution after all so they would think
about it more they would have been
convinced to the benefits of thievery by
some explanation or other now they would
try to explain why the supposed solution
didn't seem to be working
eventually they would find an
explanation that seemed better so
gradually they would persuade others of
that and so on until the majority again
opposed thievery so there we have a
great defense of fallibilism all it
means is that nothing is to be held
immune from criticism that's what
fallibilism is about and when a budding
fallibilist comes along and says
something like well what about two plus
two equals four classic response surely
that surely that thing we cannot
possibly doubt well the response to such
a person is how did you come to that
particular claim why did you choose that
particular claim out of all the possible
claims that you could have picked you
picked two plus two equals four or
plus one equals two whatever-whatever
claimer Bunning fallibilist comes up
with to try and refute the idea of
fallibilism what they've done is
actually criticized a claim found they
couldn't discover any criticisms and
presented that one to you
so the responses that finding no
criticism does not make you anti
fallibilist the key is whether you
attempted to find some flaw with an idea
and then failed to so you doubted it you
really did doubt this idea for a moment
and maybe maybe automatically
unconsciously in a way but the point is
that one's personal inability or indeed
the entire civilizations inability to
find a floor with some ID is no proof of
its certain absolute truth like I mean
it could be that it could be certain
absolute truth but it could also be
false because we just lack imagination
we lack sufficient creativity to figure
out what's wrong with that idea what
could possibly be force about that idea
and if you can't think of anything that
could possibly be false about that idea
that doesn't mean that idea couldn't
still in principle be false it could
just mean that you've got pathetic
abilities to imagine like for example
for centuries people thought that
Newton's law of gravity was absolutely
certain truth they really did and for
centuries people thought that Euclidian
geometry was the absolute truth about
virtual physical space but both was
shown to be false and in fact by the
same theory by general relativity people
once thought that God created all the
life on earth they couldn't imagine how
it was otherwise until Darwin didn't
gave a good explanation of how it was
possible and here in my opinion some
people might not like this opinion we
also connect fallibilism and
epistemology and morality to a defense
of capitalism or free trade against say
alternatives like communism the choices
between can you own private property
make a claim on certain private property
or our other people allowed to take it
from you ok because they've agreed or
decided that you have no right to it in
other words can stealing be a virtue so
this is why I think it's kind of the
calm
or socialist worldview that certain
kinds of theater lling certain kinds of
thievery are okay but that that
perspective that perspective that some
kinds are okay and maybe would one we
increase the number of things that could
be stolen until all stealing becomes a
kind of a virtue that's where we go in
the taking this theory to its extreme
but that's going to run up against some
logical problems eventually like no one
will feel safe in such a society and
eventually we will simply run out of
things to steal and when such a theory
about how to organize society fails and
it will fail the response as Hermes
suggests here and that socrates arrives
at is that people won't necessarily once
it fails can give up on the idea that
thievery is bad if they've decided it's
a virtue in some way then their
immediate response will not be to
dismiss that theory of thievery as being
a virtue but rather think we haven't
been doing enough of it we should steal
some more which tends to be the kind of
socialist conclusion that when lots and
lots of welfare or socialism generally
occurs in society but the society isn't
really thriving the response is to do
more of it to tax more to increase the
amount of welfare and things will
continue to get worse but in general the
Socialists won't think socialism is a
bad idea it's socialism that's the
problem they will just try and
instantiate ever more of it they always
want to move towards more theft and
confiscation and so on but I'm taking
David's parable from Hermes probably a
little further than he intended there
and David also says here through again
through Hermes and Socrates that
although mandating thievery would be bad
or regarding it as a virtue would be bad
it's not the worst thing that can happen
after all eventually someone would
figure out a better explanation and
would decide there are better ways to
run society than having one built upon
theft and this will come about through
thought and explanation and persuasion
which is what Athens is typically up to
but then we come to the explanation of
how there is
one kind of error one law that could be
made that is a special case that one
kind of law resists thought and
explanation and persuasion and Hermes is
about to tell us what it is how you must
laugh at us not at all Athenian as I
said I honor you now let us consider
what would happen if instead of
legalizing thievery there error had been
to ban to date and to ban philosophy and
politics and elections and that whole
constellation of activities and to
consider them shameful I see that would
have the effect of banning persuasion
and hence it would block off a path to
salvation that we have discussed this is
a rare and deadly sort of error it
prevents itself from being undone or at
least it makes salvation immensely more
difficult years and this is what Sparta
looks like to me so free speech is a
special case as we can see it provides
the conditions within which all other
debates moral political economic
scientific mathematical philosophical
can be incrementally improved as we
cannot predict the growth of knowledge
the argument that there is some speech
or some things that can never be said is
the claim about knowing that in the
future such things will not possibly
form an ingredient in the growth of
knowledge we can always think of
terrible examples about well what about
terribly racist things we shouldn't be
able to say those what about so-called
hate speech surely there are some things
which we can completely rule out what
the problem with prescribing speech in
that way is that it causes the debate
around that speech to also be shut down
so anyone who wants to explain why such
things are bad to say in the first place
can't say them they can't say the very
thing that they want to be able to
discuss the evil of and so in an open
society instead of having laws which
will send people to jail for saying
certain bad things we can more easily
distinguish between the people over
there who are saying the bad things for
certain bad reasons and the people over
here who were discussing certain things
and the people who are making jokes but
the law is often too blunt and
instrument to make these distinctions
and insofar as it tries to make these
distinctions people can still be taken
to court people can still be hauled away
by the police or simply suffer the
inconvenience of having to stand in
front of a judge and and argue that
they're not they weren't saying things
for the bad reasons that they deserve to
go to jail for deserve to be fined for
but they were the good kind and all of
this has the terrible effect of
dampening down speech of causing people
to be very quiet where they otherwise
would be openly debating things just a
little bit of a divergence here so it's
worth saying that recently there have
been two kinds of attacks on free speech
that have occurred and I'm sure these
kind of attacks have happened
generations past as well the first is
the attack against free speech by some
governments and this is truly
frightening
this means the apparatus of the state in
certain countries the state for state
violence guns police can be brought to
bear against people for what they say it
might be a joke or might be satire or
whatever but if certain things cannot be
said because they are deemed hate then
we create circumstances where there are
roadblocks to discussing why those
things are wrong if we cannot say those
things we cannot say those things for
the purpose of discussing the rightness
or wrongness of those things we cannot
improve our ideas about those things and
we cannot easily correct those people
who think but do not say those things
for fear of arrest a very good way of
countering evil hate speech just to make
fun of it is to do comedy or satire but
often judges and lawyers aren't the best
people to distinguish between what's
comedy and what's serious the average
person is but a highly learn and lawyer
might end up regarding something that
was said in jest as being quite serious
and then some poor person gets sent off
to jail mistakenly if you didn't have
such laws no such mistakes would be
possible okay so that's that that's the
government attack upon speech but
there's another kind of attack on free
speech as well so in a place like the
United States which is actually really
rare I don't know of another country
that has codified in the same way
rights the protect free speech in law in
their constitution so while they have
free speech protected from the
intrusions of government to a large
degree there is some attacks on free
speech the government is rather
powerless to address in quite such a
direct way and that is the social or
cultural pressure on free speech so we
have large social movements who
sometimes even go all the way to using
violence to attack people who say
certain things to try and suppress
certain kinds of speech it is small
comfort in those particular
circumstances if the government and
police will let you say whatever the
truth happens to be the sky is blue but
if you do say it there might be the
people who say that
no that's hate speech for whatever
ridiculous reason they might have to
label such a thing hate speech but
because you say this thing that is
eminently true or it might just simply
be your opinion you might decide to say
the sky is red because here in New South
Wales at the moment in Australia there's
been a lot of bush fires in the sky has
been red quite often whatever the case
the certain people might think that
certain speech is so beyond the pale
that you deserve to be attacked in the
street for it
so although the government will allow
you to say it there might be groups of
people that won't allow you to say and
even if they don't go all the way to
attacking you in the street they could
have boycotts against you they could
slander you etc etc and so again it's
cold comfort to people who are attacked
for saying certain things but they're
being attacked was unlawful for
knowledge growth and progress to occur
in a maximized way not only must the law
protect free speech but the culture also
has to be one of non-violence and when
the culture begins to say things like
hate speeches violence or hate speech is
not free speech then we have a proxy
means by which the powerful groups in
society despite what the government's
doing these powerful groups or other
powerful interests banned certain forms
of debate and if that is taken seriously
then regardless of what the letter of
the law is we find ourselves in a
cultural circumstance where we have an
error that is preventing itself from
being undone
now of course happily things aren't
quite that bad right now in the United
States the great strength is that it is
a state-based nation so as bad as things
get in one community with clamp downs on
certain kinds of speech by certain
groups there's always another community
equally as strong somewhere else in the
country which will protect the speaker
so there are places to go for people
that are more safe but where such
movements even begin we need to be
cautious
I mentioned the United States here
because it really is kind of the ideal
with respect to this in law in the West
elsewhere as free as speech might be
it's not as free as it is in the United
States people are being locked up
elsewhere or if they're not being locked
up there a minimum being investigated
for things said so there are certain
things in other Western countries that
cannot be said hence cannot be debated
and hence cannot be corrected except
within the national parliaments of
course but that's hardly reassuring and
I won't even mention the countries that
aren't Western countries in those places
arm of course free speeches absolutely
not on the cards yet so I'm skipping a
little more here I also see why you urge
me always to bear human fallibility in
mind
in fact since you mentioned that some
moral truths follow logically from
epistemological considerations I am now
wondering whether they all do could it
be that the moral imperative not to
destroy the means of correcting errors
is the only moral imperative that is all
other moral truths follow from it as you
wish now in regards to Athens and what
you were saying about epistemology of
how prospects for discovering new
knowledge are so good why were you
stressing the unreliability of the
census I was correcting your description
of the quest for knowledge are striving
to see beyond what is easy to see I
meant that metaphorically see in the
sense of understand yes nevertheless you
have considered that even those things
that you thought were easiest to see
literally are in fact not easy to see at
all without prior knowledge about them
in fact nothing is easy to see without
prior knowledge all knowledge of the
world was hard to come by
moreover moreover it follows that we do
not come by it through seeing it does
not flow into us through our senses
exactly yet you say that objective
knowledge is attainable so if it does
not come to us through the senses where
does that come from
suppose I were to tell you that all mode
comes from the region persuasion again
well I would reply with all due respect
that that makes no sense
whoever persuades me of something must
first have discovered it in himself so
in such a case the relevant issue is
where his knowledge came from and right
there we've got the argument against
empiricism as a side note this seems to
be one of the more contentious parts of
purpura epistemology and I'm not really
sure why people really do think that
seeing is believing or that we can
understand the world as it is by looking
ok by observing this is why that
alternative epistemology sometimes
called objectivism is something I have
long thought is perverse in calling
itself objectivism certainly in the
epistemological sense it's entirely
subjectivist on this point it says that
human senses the internal psychological
workings of the human mind are a way to
get direct knowledge from the world in
other words the individual subject can
come to know reality using their senses
in some way but the senses this
empiricist mistake the senses are able
to derive knowledge from the world out
there but we cannot detect most of what
we know to exist so it can't come to us
through the senses all the interesting
truths of science essentially are not
about what we sense so the Big Bang
evolution by natural selection the
existence of quarks stellar fusion germ
theory all these things can be known
without us ever needing to see directly
any of them it's always explaining the
scene in terms of the unseen which is an
amazing part of actual epistemology so
it takes knowledge creation and
criticism away from whatever your
fallible senses are up to and puts it in
a domain of explanation and
information of things that cannot
possibly be verified or checked by the
censors now someone might object a
little here and say well it's not the
sensors alone we use technology okay you
can't see bacteria but with a microscope
you can or you can't see what happened
at the Big Bang but you can use
telescopes to find the Cosmic Microwave
Background okay so it's not your sensors
that's not what we meant you can use
instruments and the instruments don't
wake up on the wrong side of the bed the
instruments aren't subject to optical
illusions well aren't they subject to
illusions it may be that we can augment
our sensors through the use of
technology but all that does is put us
in a domain of understanding how the
technology works and understanding how
the technology works is a theory or an
explanation about how the technology
works and that could be false and so to
use Papa's theory our sensors remain
theory laden all the time we have a
certain idea about how the sensors work
how our eyesight works the photons enter
the eye I hit the cornea they travel
through the vitreous humour they go
through the lens of the eye they
eventually reach the retina where there
are rods and cones and inside the rods
and cones there's certain chemicals
these chemicals when the light hits them
change shape and that changing the shape
sends electrical impulses down the optic
nerve which reaches the visual cortex
okay this is how seeing works but that
that whole chain of causation I just
gave you that's a theory that's an
explanation that could be wrong we don't
we know that it's correct we know that
it's correct we don't certainly know
that's correct all knowledge is
conjectural all knowledge as fallible
things could be different to what I've
just told you and so too with our
technology so now technology is theory
late and it's what it means by theory
Layden how is that how do we understand
how our sensors work how is that we
understand how our telescopes work or
our microscopes or anything else we used
to detect scientific stuff so if we were
to find that our explanation of how any
of these things the technology or our
sensors work if we found it was false in
a crucial way then the knowledge that we
had thought we'd constructed using that
sense data could could turn out to be
false this happens in science by the way
all the time
it's called systematic error if you
think you know how your telescope works
and you're making highly precise
measurements and these highly precise
measurements could be due to error but
you're not sure and you repeatedly do
the same experiment over and over again
and you get the same consistent result
it looks like your results are reliable
what reliable means is you're getting
the same result every single time but if
there's some floor with your telescope
some noise that's there that you didn't
realize then in fact although you've got
highly reliable data it could all be
completely false because your theory
about what the telescope was doing was
wrong and so the knowledge that you
think you've created is in fact false
now there's a real-life example of this
if you look up the changing
fine-structure constant this is
precisely what happened the
fine-structure constant I won't go into
it I've talked about it on previous
episodes actually but the University of
New South Wales did a big study on this
and it looked for all the world because
all the results seemed to agree that the
fine-structure constant was changing and
if the fine-structure constant was
changing this was kind of a big deal and
then one of the fundamental constants of
nature was changing perhaps the speed of
light was different in the past perhaps
the charge on an electron was different
in the past it's very interesting I
won't go into it now the point here is
that the theory that was being used that
explained how the telescope worked that
was taking the readings was wrong
we had a theory Laden observation and
then introduced this introduced a
systematic error which ultimately meant
the conclusion was false namely this
fine-structure constant was not changing
after all okay so whatever the case we
interpret the data from our technology
we interpret the data from our sensors
and like we say it's it's its
interpretations all the way down and
then we move on to the discussion with
Socrates and Hermes forward where they
become engaged about they become engaged
in concerns about the source of
knowledge hermes is attempting to impart
to socrates the idea that knowledge
doesn't come from outside of him but
socrates isn't quite so sure like namely
the knowledge that hermes is giving
socrates right now about epistemology
isn't that coming from Hermes
but Hermes wonders well what
what if I'm just a figment of your
imagination Socrates now if I am only a
figment of your imagination then who has
persuaded you brilliantly I myself
unless this dream is coming neither from
you nor from within myself but from
another source but did you not say that
you were open to persuasion by anyone if
dreams emanate from an unknown source
what difference should that make if they
are persuasive
are you not honorbound as an Athenian to
accept them it seems that I am
but what if a dream were to emanate from
a malevolent source that makes no
fundamental difference either suppose
the source purports to tell you a fact
then if you suspect that the sources of
malevolent you will try to understand
what evil it is kind of effectuate by
telling you the alleged fact but then
depending upon your explanation you may
well decide to believe it anyway
sir we can conclude that the source of
knowledge is not important the source in
a real sense is within us we create it
then criticize it by our own lights so
objective knowledge is attainable and it
doesn't matter where it appears to come
from we do not judge ideas by their
sources of course it does do you
remember what's an orphan is robbed just
after he said that objective knowledge
is attainable by humans yes the passage
continues but as for certain truths no
man has known it nor will he know it
neither of the gods nor yet of all the
things of which I speak and even if by
chance he were to utter the perfect
truth he himself would not know it so
there he's saying that although
objective knowledge is attainable
justified belief certain truth is not
yes we've covered all that but your
answer is in the next line for all is a
woven web of guesses guesses conjectures
but wait what about when knowledge does
not come from guesswork as when a God
sends me in a dream what about when I
simply hear ideas from other people they
may have guessed them but I obtain them
merely by listening you do not in all
those cases you still have to guess in
order to acquire the knowledge
I do of course have you yourself not
often being misunderstood even by people
try hard to understand you yes have you
interned not often misunderstood what
someone means even when he was trying to
tell you what's clearly as he can indeed
I have not least during this
conversation here this brings to mind
poppers I guess you could call it his
criterion of comprehensibility it is
impossible to speak in such a way as to
not be misunderstood so I'm gonna skip a
little here and then indeed most guesses
are not new knowledge although guesswork
is the origin of all knowledge it is
also a source of error and therefore
what happens to an idea after it has
been guessed is crucial so let me
combine this insight with what I know of
criticism a guess might come from a
dream or it might just be a wild
speculation or a random combination of
ideas or anything but then we do not
just accept it blindly because we
imagine it is authorized or because we
want it to be true instead we criticize
it and try to discover its flaws yes
that is what you should do at any rate
then we try to remedy those floors by
altering the idea or dropping it in
favor of others and the alterations and
the other ideas are themselves guesses
and are themselves criticized only when
we fail in these attempts either to
reject or improve an idea do we
provisionally accept it I'm skipping a
little bit more here it all comes from
within the conjecture and criticism wait
it comes from within
even if revealed by a god and it's just
as fallible as ever yes your argument
covers that case just like any other
maja Valles but now what about the
objects that we experience in the
natural world we reach out and touch an
object and hence experience it out there
surely that is a different kind of
knowledge a kind which fallible or not
really does come from without at least
in the sense that our own experience is
out there at the location of the object
love the idea that all those are the
different kinds of knowledge originate
in the same way and are improved in the
same way
why is direct sensory experience
and exception what if it just seems
radically different but surely you are
now asking me just to believe in a sort
of all-encompassing conjuring trick
resembling the fanciful notion that the
whole of life is really is just a dream
for it would mean that the sensation of
touching an object does not happened
where I experienced it happening namely
in the hand that touches but in the mind
which I believe is located somewhere in
the brain so all my sensations of touch
are located inside my skull where in
reality nothing in touch while I still
live and whenever I think I'm seeing a
vast brilliantly illuminated landscape
all that I am really experiencing is
likewise located entirely inside my
skull where in reality it is constantly
dark is that sort where do you think all
the sights and sounds of this dream are
located I accept that they are indeed in
my mind but that is my point
most dreams portray things that are
simply not there in the external reality
to portray things that are there is
surely impossible without some input
that does not come from the mind but
from those things themselves
well reason Socrates but is that input
needed in the source of your dream or
only in your ongoing criticism of it you
mean that we first guess what is there
and then what we test our guesses
against the input from our senses yes I
see and then we hone our guesses and
then fashion the best ones into a sort
of waking dream of reality yes a waking
dream that corresponds to reality but
there is more it is a dream of which you
then gain control you do that by
controlling the corresponding aspects of
the external reality it is a wonderfully
unified theory and consistent as far as
I can tell but am I really to accept
that I myself the thinking being that I
call I has no direct knowledge of the
physical world at all but can only
receive arcane hints of it through
flickers and shadows that happen to
impinge upon my eyes and other senses
and that what I experience as reality is
never more than a waking dream composed
of conjectures originating from within
myself you have an alternative
explanation no and the more I
contemplate this one the more delighted
I become a sensation of which I should
beware yet I am also persuaded
everyone knows that man is the paragon
of animals but if this epistemology you
tell me is true and we are infinitely
more marvelous creatures than that here
we sit forever imprisoned in the dark
almost sealed cave of our skull guessing
we weave stories of an outside world
worlds actually a physical world a moral
world a world of abstract geometrical
shapes and so on but we are not
satisfied with merely weaving nor with
mere stories we want true explanations
so we seek explanations that remain
robust when we test them against those
flickers and shadows and against each
other and against criteria of logic and
reasonableness and everything else we
can think of and when we can change them
no more we have understood some
objective truth and if that were not
enough what we understand we then
control it is like magic only real we
are like gods
well sometimes you discover some
objective truth and exert some control
as a result but often when you think you
have achieved any of that you haven't so
that's all wonderful and again follows
from some material in the fabric of
reality our minds really are a kind of
virtual reality we are virtual reality
ourselves constantly checking against
actual reality and updating our model of
the external world inside of our minds
now this is a very powerful idea that
contains within a lots of known
philosophy and science as well namely we
are programs of a kind our mind is a
program it's a bit of software what kind
well it's it's a creative explanation
generating kind explanation of what well
everything including the external
reality that we find ourselves in our
explanations often explicit of that
external physical world they're the
things that in a sense illuminate our
mind the illumination of the actual
physical world is incurring strangely
within the utter darkness of our own
brains in there it is actually
physically completely dark but that is
where the bright lights of the waking
world are being generated and presented
to our consciousness of course there are
actual real lights in there in the
external world but those lights only
enter our
before they are completely absorbed and
destroyed okay and our retina they are
then converted into electrical impulses
and it's then that we have the
experience of light but the light that
we have the experience of inside of our
minds is not the same as the light
that's outside of our minds
yes it's unusual to think of things in
this way all of our senses the sight
taste touch smell hearing it's all
happening inside the mind and just
checked again with respect to what is
happening outside and then we update our
ideas and all of this is completely
fallible
the checking might go wrong the neurons
might misfire the sensors can deceive
you but nonetheless we learn more and
more and understand and thus gain more
and more control over the external world
as Socrates says all right
but if we choose to are you saying that
there is no upper bound to how much we
can eventually understand and control
and achieve funny you should ask that
generations from now a book will be
written which will provide a compelling
and excellent there's Hermes hinting at
the writing of the beginning of infinity
indicating that he does appear to be a
time traveler of some sorts and there
I'm going to end part one we've only had
two characters so far so next time I
have to introduce some of the rest of
the cast would it be nice if someone
actually did produce a produce a
live-action version of this little play
maybe that's the next thing we can hope
for and blockbuster philosophy until
next time
[Music]